---
layout: post
title: Heat Death
date: 2025-08-06 17:54 +0200
categories: [short-stories]
tags: [science fiction, fiction]
---

This is the moment my team at _Brysonis, Inc._ has tirelessly been working for for the past two quarters. The final feature to our core product, a feat thought unachievable and far above anything our competitors have to offer. My direct lead, Kirsten C., has just returned from her sharing some final notes to our CMO regarding the press brief. The deployment is already scheduled for noon and she is pleased to inform us that there will be a taco buffet in the break room and that she's also set up some trays with home-made chocolate-zucchini bars. I'm pretty sure she did not bake them herself though, as she was probably crafting e-mails and slack messages with Copilot deep into the night, informing stakeholders and making last-minute arrangements. The baked goods were most likely a product of her wife's doing, whom I had met twice at company festivities, and who I can now in retrospect vividly imagine weighing, mixing, and poking with toothpicks while Kirsten C. is still on her laptop.

Anyway, the tacos and cake pieces are probably in part a gesture of goodwill and an apology for some of the more heated discussions and required crunch time in the last few weeks, even if it was mostly limited to the most senior designers and engineers. In only a few minutes, at noon exactly, the update will be rolled out to billions of personal devices. Our industry was long thought to be a bit behind the times, now that transportation, food, media, healthcare—basically anything anyone requires in their lives, is predictive and will always be provided at exactly the desired time without any manual intervention. But we stuck it to all their faces and delivered one of the greatest updates of the decade. The atmosphere is magical and I can feel a true sense of pride, companionship, and excitement all around. Even our head architect, Peter B., who normally is quite reserved or even annoyed at everyone and everything appears to be bursting with glee.

From my position at the coffee machine I can see Kirsten making gestures for everyone to be silent for a moment. She only wants to say how proud she is of our team, how we put everything behind our mission to achieve peak excellence in customer-centricity. Since everything is happening automatically anyway we should not wait until 12 p.m. and just take a bite, have a seat, and enjoy the company of our colleagues. I pick up my mug and walk over to the others to join in the buffet.

A few moments must have passed. I'm not sure how long I have sat here but the traffic outside, usually so omnipresent in this downtown office, seems to have stopped. Elaine K. is standing opposite of me at the window, eyes wide open. She looks tired and scared at the same time. What time is it? Has the release already happened? Is it evening? No, it must still be day. Everyone is still here, Andrew H., Melissa B.—even Kirsten is just... sitting here? The light coming from outside is cold and diffuse, yet somehow glaring. The automatic blinds seem to be stuck in a neutral position. Normally they would be changing orientation based on the shifting incidence of the sun. But much like everyone else in the room—including myself—they appear calcified.

I wonder how the update went. Were our users satisfied? They must be. We had A/B-ed this so many times, improved UX at every stage so incessantly, that there is just no way the release could have failed. It was so hard. I had—we all had to spend so many evenings going over design specs again and again, missing out on our personal lives. When you're already so close to the ultimate consumer experience, to the end of want, so to speak, every miniscule step takes more and more energy, as you asymptotically approach perfection. We worked so hard, there wasn't even mental capacity to add anything to our roadmap for after.

Why has no-one moved? Are we so exhausted that we cannot expense enough calories to even just raise an arm? No-one has talked in a while and I'm still just sitting here. Normally, my back would be complaining after sitting in the same position for—I don't know how long, but probably quite a few minutes. Or hours? Yet, I feel relaxed. At the bottom edge of my field of view I can see my right arm resting on my leg. It's hard to fully discern, but I'm now quite sure that it... it changes? Yes, I'm sure now. The pores on my arm are dilating to peppercorn size, seeping out some kind of viscuous liquid. Thick like a sugary syrup. And it's not just me, everyone in the room seems to be similarly affected. My spongy skin, so alien now. A translucent film embalming us as we watch each other in perfect stasis.

I think I may be starving.
