---
layout: post
title: The Space between the Walls
date: 2025-06-28 17:48 +0200
categories: [short-stories]
tags: [history, fiction]
---

The first night was the worst. The wails began that afternoon after they had realized the Romans would not let them evacuate. Already starving when they had been cast out, they grew more and more desperate in their impotence to change what the gods had determined to be their fate, and possibly all of ours as well. Vercingetorix was adamant about not letting them inside again. They were useless mouths and our chances multiplied without them, more so if they softened our enemies’ hearts or if some Roman guards, among them Gauls as well, could not bear the helpless cries any longer and slipped them some of their own supplies. They were told he might let them pass, but we knew Caesar was callous, as we were it, too.

I’m not from here, so these are not my people, even if Vercingetorix is said to rule over all us Gauls as king. But in the time that has passed since we set up here, I got to watch them. With every day their eyes grew wider in terror as the Romans constructed our enclosure, cutting down the surrounding woods our involuntary hosts had known their whole lives. I try not to romanticize them, the peaceful in-betweens, the deepening of wrinkles and the emergence of freckle patterns born with every new generation, like new constellations. There is hunger—often; sickness—sometimes; and loss—arriving in irregular seasons not bound to the cycles of nature and the sun. When they arrive, they fill up the air with an oppressive humidity, packing it denser and denser, until it cannot hold it anymore, releasing all the dread and despair at once. It rushes into our lungs and we suffocate. But then—nothing happens. It all just stops; and the waters slowly ebb away, back to the place where the suffering of humans lies to rest until it is needed again.

But in all of this remain the warm faces of your kin, the walls that make your home, and the familiar grooves and patches in the bark of the nearby hazel trees—all of them changing too slowly for us to notice in the succession of days that make up our lives. All of these moments cannot just vanish; they need a place to go, and for the past few days, they seem to have inserted themselves into me, a stranger to these people.

They did not choose this—we chose them. And history chose us and Vercingetorix. Now, the crying echoes of inconsolable mothers, robbed of their sheltering homes, of the food they had themselves harvested not long ago, and most hauntingly, of their children's futures, bounce from wall to wall, dutifully exhausting themselves, until they are ready to seep into the muddy ground, marking the spot where history came to Gaul.

My village is several days to the north of here and much smaller than this place. In this life, you can only hope for short winters and for yourself and your family not crossing paths with armies, foreign or local. We think of our lives as stationary, but this is an illusion born from the comfort of rurality. Because what really traverses the world is not a person’s body or possessions, but rather time, and the instruments of war—be they trumpets or horns. Few people are lucky never to collide during their lifetime with these masses of progression, silent from afar, but deafening so suddenly, when they have pierced the invisible barrier into one’s world.

We have taken from many villages on our way here, often more than they could give, and have exacted justice on those who did not fall in line behind our new king. Now, finally, we have brought our horns to these people.

There are still some skeletons left, ill-looking and unkempt, death-marching from one palisade to the other, only to have their pleading ignored and stones slung at them. In a sense, they are reassuring, in that they desire still to fight for their lives. We have not robbed them of that. The catatonic families are much worse, I can hardly tell of it; the huddles of the semi-living strewn across the grassy landscape—a walled garden ornamented with graying limbs that cannot comfort each other, and eyes asking questions into empty space. They surely must feel betrayed, not just by us, their self-professed liberators, but by life itself, and have thus lost their attachment to it out of acrid disdain.

I don’t know why we set up our stand here, it could have been a few villages over in that direction, or this, but it sounded like a good plan at first, on this fortified hill with our allies so close by. But as has become apparent, we cannot be sure of divine blessings in our human interventions. There exists only one true direction. And now the world will evermore weep for poor Alesia.
